Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,
Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell
And the profit and loss.
A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell
He passed the stages of his age and youth
Entering the whirlpool.
Gentile or Jew
O you who turn the wheel and look to windward,
Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.
Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
Cared for by servants to the number of four.
Now when she died there was silence in heaven
And silence at her end of the street.
The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet
He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
The dogs were handsomely provided for,
But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
And the footman sat upon the dining-table
Holding the second housemaid on his knees
Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.
They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
And along the trampled edges of the street
I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
Sprouting despondently at area gates.
The brown waves of fog toss up to me
Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
An aimless smile that hovers in the air
And vanishes along the level of the roofs.
As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her 
laughter and being part of it, until her teeth were 
only accidental stars with a talent for squad-drill. I 
was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at each momentary 
recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her 
throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An 
elderly waiter with trembling hands was hurriedly 
spreading a pink and white checked cloth over the rusty 
green iron table, saying: "If the lady and gentleman 
wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and 
gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden ..." I 
decided that if the shaking of her breasts could be 
stopped, some of the fragments of the afternoon might 
be collected, and I concentrated my attention with 
careful subtlety to this end.
I observe: "Our sentimental friend the moon!
Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
It may be Prester John's balloon
Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
To light poor travellers to their distress."
She then: "How you digress!"
And I then: "Some one frames upon the keys
That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
The night and moonshine; music which we seize
To body forth our vacuity."
She then: "Does this refer to me?"
"Oh no, it is I who am inane."
"You, madam, are the eternal humorist,
The eternal enemy of the absolute,
Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist!
With your aid indifferent and imperious
At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--"
And "Are we then so serious?"
Tired. 
Subterrene laughter synchronous 
With silence from the sacred wood 
And bubbling of the uninspired 
Mephitic river. 
Misunderstood 
The accents of the now retired 
Profession of the calamus.
Tortured. 
When the bridegroom smoothed his hair 
There was blood upon the bed. 
Morning was already late. 
Children singing in the orchard 
(Io Hymen, Hymenaee) 
Succuba eviscerate.
Tortuous. 
By arrangement with Perseus 
The fooled resentment of the dragon 
Sailing before the wind at dawn 
Golden apocalypse. Indignant 
At the cheap extinction of his taking-off. 
Now lies he there 
Tip to tip washed beneath Charles' Wagon.